Summary:
Data Encryption and Decryption Using RSA Algorithm in a Network
Environment, Nentawe Y. Goshwe
Arham Chopra
Data security has become a very important aspect in the modern world. With the spread of networks(ie Internet)
many e-commerce, online banking, email and many more services have become commonplace. Even if they
provide us with the ease of many things they come at a great risk of privacy and security. The ease with which
we can avail these facilities and is just the same someone else availing those facilities in our name. For example
if someone were to gain access to the bank username and password of someone, he could easily do transactions
as if it were the actual person himself. Cryptography provides the solution to all of these.
On the basis of the number of keys used in encryption the various methods can be divided into 3 categories.
• Secret Key Cryptography : These methods make use of a single key for both encryption and decryption.
• Public Key Cryptography : These methods make use of a two keys a public key, known to all, for
encryption and a private key, kept secret, for decryption.
• Hash Functions : These methods make use of an irreversible function (rather than keys) to keep data
in a format such that no information can be retrieved of the original data. They are generally used for
data integrity.
RSA
RSA is one of the Public Key Cryptography methods.
Operations
The RSA algorithm involves three steps: key generation, encryption and decryption.
Key Generation
1. Two large distinct prime numbers p and q are chosen at random using primality tests. This makes factoring
harder.
2. Evaluate the modulus n as n = pq and then find φ(n)
3. Now we choose our public key (say ’e’) such that 1 < e < φ(n) and gcd(e, φ(n)) = 1 as the public key
exponent.
4. And now for the private key exponent, we find d such that d = e
−1 mod φ(n).
5. Thus we have: The public key consisting of the modulus n and the public (or encryption) exponent e.
And the private key consists of the modulus n and the private (or decryption) exponent d, which must be
kept secret. p, q, and φ(n) must also be kept secret because they can be used to calculate d.
Key Generation
1. Both A and B agree upon a padding scheme (reversible protocol).
2. A sends his/her public key (n, e) to B but keeps the private key d a secret.
3. If B now wants to send a message M to A, B converts the message M into an integer m using the padding
scheme B the computes the ciphertext c as c = me mod n B then transmits c to A.
1
Key Generation
1. A recovers the integer m from c as m = c
d mod n
2. Given m, A recovers the original message M by reversing the padding scheme.
2